#chem #whatarethemechanismsofchemicalchange

Reactivity 3.1.12 - the pH of a salt solution depends on the relative strengths of the parent acid and base

$$
\begin{array}{}
\text{parent base}&+&\text{parent acid}&\to&\text{salt}&+&\text{water} \\
\ce{MOH}&+&\ce{HA}&\to&\ce{M+A-}&+&\ce{H_{2}O}
\end{array}
$$
the salt formed in a neutralisation reaction is an ionic compound:
- the cation is the conjugate acid of the parent base
- the anion is the conjugate base from the parent acid

- neutralisation reactions do not all form neutral aqueous solutions
- the $\text{pH}$ of a salt solution depends on whether and to what extent their ions react with water and hydrolyse it - releasing $\ce{H+}$ or $\ce{OH-}$ ions

the relative strengths of the conjugate acids and bases in the salt determine the extent of hydrolysis reactions

###### salt of strong acid and strong base - no hydrolysis
$$
\ce{HCl(aq) +NaOH(aq)\to \underset{\textcolor{lightgreen }{ \text{neutral salt solution}}}{ NaCl(aq) +H_{2}O(l) }}
$$
the conjugate acid and the conjugate base are both weak, so there is virtually no hydrolysis of ions, and the $\text{pH}$ is closer to neutral

###### salt of weak acid and strong base - anion hydrolysis
$$
\ce{
CH_{3}COOH(aq) +NaOH(aq)\to \underset{ \textcolor{lightgreen}{\text{basic salt solution}}}{ NaCH_{3}COO(aq) +H_{2}O(l) }
}
$$
this is because the conjugate base of $\ce{CH_{3}COOH}$, a weak acid, is a strong base: $\ce{CH_{3}COO-}$, which causes the release of $\ce{OH-}$ ions

###### salt of strong acid and weak base - cation hydrolysis
$$
\ce{
HCl(aq) +NH_{4}OH(aq)\to \underset{ \textcolor{lightgreen}{\text{acidic salt solution}} }{ NH_{4}Cl(aq) +H_{2}O(l) }
}
$$
this is because the conjugate acid of the weak base $\ce{NH_{4}OH}$ is a strong acid and is able to cause hydrolysis. the release of $\ce{H+}$ ions decreases the $\text{pH}$

###### salt of weak acid and weak base
the salt formed has relatively strong conjugates and both carry out hydrolysis. the $\text{pH}$ of the solution formed depends on the $K_{\text{a}}$ and $K_{\text{b}}$ of the acids and bases involved.

##### challenge question
7. formulate equations for reactions that produce the salt ammonium nitrate from its parent acid and base and deduce the $\text{pH}$ of its solution.

	at high temperatures, solid $\ce{NH_{4}NO_{3}}$ decomposes to produce nitrogen, oxygen and water. formulate equations for this reaction and suggest why it can be explosive.

$$
\begin{align}
&\ce{NH_{4}OH(aq) +HNO_{3}(aq)\to NH_{4}NO_{3}(aq) +H_{2}O(l)} \\
&\ce{2NH_{4}NO_{3}(s)\to{2}N_{2}(g) +4H_{2}O(g) +O_{2}(g)}
\end{align}
$$
2 moles of solid releases 7 moles of gas, causes rapid expansion and increase in pressure. $\ce{O2}$ ignites easily.